---
title: 'My experience with homeschooling.'
date: 2020-12-24
permalink: /posts/2020/12/blog-post-2/my-experience-with-homeschooling
excerpt: "In the middle of my secondary school, I decided to quit it and start homeschooling (or maybe self-eduction). I do not regret it. **It was great**. Starting from the educational benefits ending on the financial ones. Not having done this earlier is my only regret." 
tags:
  - Education
  - Homeschooling

---

## Some background

In the middle of my secondary school, I decided to quit it and start homeschooling (or maybe self-eduction). I do not regret it. **It was great**. Starting from the educational benefits ending on the financial ones. From the time perspective, not having done this earlier is my only regret.

## Education

After quitting school I finally started to have more time to do things that I was interested in. In school every day, I had to waste 40-90 minutes to get there. Adding additional time for breaks and some organisational stuff i.e. attendance check, I would estimate that around 20% of the time is wasted on such irrelevant things. Cutting these things alone save me 8 hours **every week**.

Students in general have different talents. I was always quite good at maths and physics, but on the other hand, I was terrible at writing essays etc (N.B. the teacher from my former school had told me that with homeschooling I wouldn't be able to prepare myself for the end of school exams). Though, I managed to be in the top 2% in the polish language exam at the end of school. I achieved that despite spending less than 2 hours per week on it (In the school that was about 3x as much. Pareto principle in practice?).  How did I manage to do that? I found a teacher who agreed to give a private lesson to me once per week. As these lessons were tailor-made, I could focus on my underbellies. All of this for about £15/week. Besides, I have found that learning all of this can also be quite plausible. As always, choosing the curriculum together with a teacher is always better than the teacher forcing students to follow his plan.

With English and Spanish things were even simpler since I was already attending some extracurricular classes to **broaden my knowledge**. That saved me another **6 hours every week**. Additionally, these activities prevented me from becoming some kind of a social zombie.

Learning my core subjects in that way was also significantly easier. For maths, every week I was meeting with a retired teacher who also was passionate about various mathematical Olympiads. Although I was not participating in any of these, his insights, tips and tricks were extremely helpful for me.

Last but not least, with physics, it was even simpler. Through my secondary school, I was attending an extracurricular (**unpaid**!) classes focused on the physics Olympiad, which were run by a local teacher. When I told him about my decision to start homeschooling, he offered to have an additional meeting with me every week. During these meetings, we were discussing additional problems. Later some of my friends also started attending these meetings. That was fun! More importantly, he had also provided and other students me with an incredible network of connections. Starting from current and former Oxford students to science prodigies. If it wasn't for their help, I wouldn't get into Oxford. Later, during my first year, he's even visited me in the UK. 

All these things allowed me to work at my very own pace. The results were quite spectacular. I have finished **all** of the exams approximately two months before the deadline. Not bad. What's more, surprisingly I found out that suddenly I had **more time** than before. Thanks to this, I could participate in a research project organised by a PhD from the local university, work or just chill out.

## Finances

For one year all the classes cost me (or rather my parents) about £2000. Given polish reality, that's not little, however, the only additional class that I had to take up because of starting homeschooling was only about £600 a year. Additionally, since I had more time than my school attending peers I could also support myself financially. 

Thanks to my cousin, I worked part-time in Norway for two summers. Apart from getting some valuable experience, during that time I earned about £6000. This + generous Oxford bursary allowed me to be quite independent during the first year of my studies. Sliding on a snow sauce in the middle of summer or experiencing white nights were also unique experiences.

## Other pros

Homeschooling has yet another advantage over the traditional school. You can learn **everywhere**.  Trips in the middle of the school year? A one day trip to Brussels? Opera concert in the middle of the week? No problem. The sky is the limit. With traditional school, this would be significantly harder to do, if not impossible. Apart from that, this also made the whole university application process less stressful and simpler. I could delay some of the less important duties for later and prepare properly for the aptitude tests and the interviews.

## Summary

I believe that homeschooling is a very efficient way of studying. From my experience, I can say, that it has worked remarkably well for me. The only (non-financial) *must-haves* that I can think of are self-reliance and a sincere curiosity for the world around us.

With younger kids, this may be significantly harder, since for them is not as much about education as about social skills. Parents also have to replace teachers, which can be time-consuming and hard (after all no one knows everything). Nevertheless, some communities have shown this can be efficiently solved e.g. by organising local groups of home-schooled kids, which also makes it more affordable.