---
title: 'I wish I had become a comedian or why I have lost my interest in physics.'
date: 2020-12-12
permalink: /posts/2020/12/I-wish-I-had-become-a-comedian-or-why-I-have-lost-my-interest-in-physics/
tags:
  - cool posts
  - category1
  - category2

---

> At the moment physics is again terribly confused. In any case, it is too difficult for me, and I wish I had been a movie comedian or something of the sort and had never heard of physics.
>
> Wolfgang Pauli

### Introduction

Starting my physics degree at Oxford I was very passionate about it. I was even thinking of becoming an academic someday. However, having studied it for almost three years, I am almost a hundred per cent sure that **physics is not my cup of tea**. Wolfgang Pauli said the words from the above quote in 1925. A few years later he had won a Nobel prize in physics. Nonetheless, I reckon that his words describe what I am currently feeling.

There are many reasons for me losing my interest in physics, some of them were not dependent on me, whilst the others are just my very own fault/failure. However, the point of this post is not to feel sorry for me. The ultimate goal is to put my thoughts in order. Hopefully, someday this will also be some kind of consolation for people who fill find themselves in a similar situation.

<u>Please note, that my criticism is directed towards the undergraduate-level physics. Some of the arguments e.g. those from "Shut up and calculate" may be misleading or even completely wrong for higher-level physics.</u>

### Physics is boring

I got interested in physics because, at the end of my secondary school, I had met a great teacher who was preparing students for various physics competitions and Olympiads. Although I have never achieved any success in those, they made me *passionate* about physics. The reason for it was simple, the problems were interesting and not too convoluted at the same time. Besides, many of them were explaining seemingly complex physical phenomenons with very simple yet appealing models. In other words, one could evaluate the performance of most of the models with a naked eye. E.g. rainbow's intensity is the greatest for at a certain angle, which can be predicted by looking at light's path inside of a water drop.

However, the real (?) physics is completely different from that. It can be best summarised by three words **blood, sweat and tears**. In most cases, teaching students the most basic theories (i.e. the whole undergraduate degree) takes months. At this stage, understanding and basic physical intuition are not enough. You have to memorise dozens of formulas, derivations and strategies for solving problems in a given area of physics, in most cases only for the sake of passing the exam and then forgetting the majority of them.

Moreover, things no longer connect so easily and fast. One has to put in way more time and effort, to see any meaningful implications of a theory. The most blatant example, I can think of is the vector potential. It's defined as$\ \vec{B}=\nabla\times{\vec{A}}$. While, the magnetic field density is relatively easy to interpret, either by looking at the formula for the magnetic force acting on a charge $\ \vec{F}=q\vec{v}\times\vec{B}$ or by interpreting it as $\mathcal{E}=-\frac{d\phi}{dt}$, where$\ \mathcal{E}$ is the EMF and $\ \phi$ is the magnetic flux. This concept is very physical and easy to take up quickly because one knows what's the purpose of and how to "use" it. The magnetic potential is the exact opposite. It's introduced just without any purpose other than making students calculate it as one of the assignments. Later, it turns out that it makes the equations in the special relativity more concise but in my case, I had to wait for over a year to see an example of why it's useful - definitely too long.

### Shut up and calculate

As I have already said, the interpretability of the physical theories, was something that appealed to me in the old days. That's yet another aspect, which is completely different for academic physics. One creates more and more sophisticated theories, which get less and less interpretable. During the lectures or when reading a textbook, I often felt that we are killing the intrinsic beauty inside nature with a surplus of maths. As one digs deeper and deeper into physics there are more and more such topics. Often by the end of some derivation, one no longer remembers what was the original goal of it. Introducing lots of new symbols/terms in the meantime makes it even worse.

We, humans, tend to be lazy. Maybe that's why starting from maths without going deeper into the interpretation may be more convenient than building everything on top of physical intuition. Jeremy Howard, who is a famous data scientist calls it "top to bottom approach". As a positive example, a YouTube channel [3 Blue 1 Brown](https://www.youtube.com/channel/UCYO_jab_esuFRV4b17AJtAw) run by Grant Sanderson makes a great job by explaining various topics in that way. 

Please don't get me wrong. I am not against using sophisticated maths to do physics. I am pretty sure that it's close to impossible to do the cutting edge research without it. However, do we need to treat the undergraduates as if they were state of the art researchers? Maybe top researchers can create such theories *because* they are good at interpreting the maths behind them and not just blindly following it?  All the text from that section can be summed up with two words **Intuition First!**.

### Strict curriculum

I never liked being forced to do something. Such a method never worked for me.  Having quitted high school and starting to study on my own, I was acquiring more material in a shorter time. There was a simple reason for that. I was learning things not because I *had* to but because I *wanted to*. Thanks to this, I was having more time to dig deeper into topics that were interesting for me. That's another thing that I dislike about university education. Choosing physics, you only learn subjects related to it. In my case, there was not much space for taking a class from other departments/areas. I know that some of the courses are essential, however, some of them can be easily omitted without much harm. As far as I know, a similar system works in the US, where people can choose a variety of subjects when doing their minors. Such an approach can also be justified by looking at other universities curriculums. In general, they don't overlap in hundred per cent. For instance, I have never had a proper introduction to mathematical analysis, while for some other universities this seems to be one of the core subjects during the first years.

Such an approach could have a huge positive impact on students during the later stages of their careers. Pretending that every person who studies physics will become a physicist looks like a delusion. Even for a physicist, a course in project management would be beneficial. After all, isn't managing a research group important? 
These days the importance of the computational methods is also growing. So far, I have only had one programming class. It was very basic and the language used was MATLAB, which is not widely used outside of some very specific areas of academia and industry.

### Change of interest

Last but not least, I have simply found another area, that I'm passionate about. That area is Data Science. It resembles all of the good things in physics that I enjoyed. Being a physics student reading a paper from a top conference is very hard if not impossible for me and most students. On the contrary, I can read and understand the state of the art data science papers without much problem. Pages like [Papers with code](https://paperswithcode.com/) or [Two Minute Papers](https://www.youtube.com/user/keeroyz) make a great job in helping students like myself to do so. Likewise, [Kaggle](https://www.kaggle.com/) allows everyone to test their skills on a fairground. No matter if you are a professor or a student, it doesn't matter. Your results are what matters. Also, in most cases, you can see the direct impact of the model quickly e.g. by deploying a melanoma detecting neural network.

I regret to say, that I do not see such efforts being made in physics. Apart from a couple of academic Olympiads, which look more like art for the art's sake rather than making any meaningful contribution, there isn't much effort put into making the research more accessible for students.

### Do I regret it?

Yes. I wish I had known all these things before choosing physics as my degree.

### Summary

That's why I am no longer interested in physics. Nevertheless, I still do have huge respect for people who are physicists. 

> Jan Malinowski 
